Asynchronous decision policy proposal (#1108)
w3c/wot: proposals/policies/async-decision.md

This form of asynchronous decision process specifies how to conduct asynchronous decisions that are already written in the Working Group's existing [Decision Policy](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/wot-wg-charter.html#decisions).

### Non-normative Changes

- For non-normative or editorial changes to the wording of a specification or its supporting documents, a code review approval from a single Editor of the specification is sufficient to merge a pull request.

### Normative Changes

- For normative or breaking changes to a specification, approval is required by at least two Editors of a specification that are not from the same organization. Editors should use GitHub's code review tool to either:
  - Approve the pull request (approval may be conditional on making some small changes like fixing typos before landing, noted in a comment)
  - Request changes to the pull request, explained in a comment
  - Comment to say that they have no strong opinion or that they abstain, deferring to the opinion of other editors

> - A pull request can be landed once two editors have either provided their approval or deferred to the other editors.

Reviewer: This sounds like if two editors defer the decision can be made.  Needs to be clarified.  Do you mean if one editor defers, a single editor can make the decision?   What if a document only has one editor?

Author: I would need @benfrancis opinion here but my understanding is that an editor can leave the responsability to another editor and that other editor should decide. We can simply change it to `A pull request can be landed once two editors have either provided their approval`

Regarding one editor: I think all our (REC track) documents should have at least two editors.

Author: I have removed this deferral text. No need to complicate things at this point. We can change a policy later on if needed.

- Editors are expected to provide formal reviews, but all members (and non-members) may contribute to the public discussion on GitHub and Editors are responsible for determining consensus. Reviews may be requested from other interested members in order to ascertain consensus.
- If there are request for changes from other members, they should be taken into account.

> - If a consensus can not be reached asynchronously where the Pull Request discussion thread goes long (more than 10 comments) without making progress, then a synchronous discussion in a web conference is needed to arrive at a consensus. If a unanimous decision can not be reached, then Chairs may call for a group vote to resolve a deadlock in line with the Working Group's existing [Decision Policy](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/wot-wg-charter.html#decisions).

Reviewer: Let's not use "vote" here, let's just say "call for a group decision".   Also, should start by saying "consensus cannot be reached by the task force editors".  In general this entire policy should be limited to the scope of a single deliverable and task force (implicit, would be good to state it explicitly in the intro)

Author: ```suggestion
- If a consensus can not be reached by the editors asynchronously where the Pull Request discussion thread goes long (more than 10 comments) without making progress, then a synchronous discussion in a web conference is needed to arrive at a consensus. If a unanimous decision can not be reached, then Chairs may call for a group decision to resolve a deadlock in line with the Working Group's existing [Decision Policy](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/wot-wg-charter.html#decisions).
```

This proposal was originally [submitted](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-wot-wg/2021Aug/0006.html) to the public-wot-wg mailing list on 3rd August 2021 and followed up by @benfrancis at https://github.com/w3c/wot/pull/1005/files.
This version extends it by taking the reviews into account, while moving the problem and notes into an Appendix section.

## Proposed Solution

### Overall Idea

It is proposed to use GitHub's built-in [code review tools](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/about-pull-request-reviews) to formally review pull requests without having to wait for a decision in a synchronous weekly call.
This form of asynchronous decision process specifies how to conduct asynchronous decisions that are already written in the Working Group's existing [Decision Policy](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/wot-wg-charter.html#decisions).

### Non-normative Changes

- For non-normative or editorial changes to the wording of a specification or its supporting documents, a code review approval from a single Editor of the specification is sufficient to merge a pull request.

### Normative Changes

> - For normative or breaking changes to a specification, approval is required by at least two Editors of a specification that are not from the same organization. Editors should use GitHub's code review tool to either:

Reviewer 2: we should clarify if IEs also considered as an "organization".

Author: There are W3C documents which have mostly IEs. I think each IE should be considered as a separate organization in this context. So if one member and one IE give approval or if two give approval, it should be considered a real approval.

Author: Incorporated last week

>   - Approve the pull request (approval may be conditional on making some small changes like fixing typos before landing, noted in a comment)

Author: Good point, I am open for this change as well

>   - Approve the pull request (approval may be conditional on making some small changes like fixing typos before landing, noted in a comment)

Author: I have changed this to simplify. If need a more "complex" approval process, we can change the policy later on.

  - Request changes to the pull request, explained in a comment
  - Comment to say that they have no strong opinion or that they abstain, deferring to the opinion of other editors
- A pull request can be landed once two editors have either provided their approval or deferred to the other editors.
- Editors are expected to provide formal reviews, but all members (and non-members) may contribute to the public discussion on GitHub and Editors are responsible for determining consensus. Reviews may be requested from other interested members in order to ascertain consensus.
- If there are request for changes from other members, they should be taken into account.

> - If a consensus can not be reached by the editors asynchronously where the Pull Request discussion thread goes long (more than 10 comments) without making progress, then a synchronous discussion in a web conference is needed to arrive at a consensus. If a unanimous decision can not be reached, then Chairs may call for a group decision to resolve a deadlock in line with the Working Group's existing [Decision Policy](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/wot-wg-charter.html#decisions).

Reviewer 3: more than 10 comments for estimating long discussions is a little bit vague. For example, 10 people commenting about the importance of the changes and saying that they like it, is not really a "long discussion" is just 10 people supporting the changes. Moreover, in one review people can create serveral review comments, are those counted?

Author: I had some issues about this as well and was expecting some feedback. I think the TF moderators should identify long and deadlock discussions. How they identify that can be subjective or we agree on some metric but I think it is too difficult to find an objective metric. We can turn it into a more vague statement.

Reviewer 3: Some metrics that we can advise editors to use: 

1. **Number of Comments**: A long and complex discussion often involves multiple participants sharing their thoughts and opinions. Look for a high number of comments on the PR. You can see the comment count on the PR's page.

2. **Comment Depth**: Check if the comments have nested replies. This indicates that the discussion has branched off into sub-conversations, making it more complex.

3. **Comment Length**: Lengthy comments often suggest a detailed and in-depth discussion. Look for comments that span multiple paragraphs or contain extensive explanations.

4. **Time Span**: If the discussion has been ongoing for a significant period, it might indicate complexity. A PR with a long and complex discussion is likely to have active comments spanning days, weeks, or even months.

5. **Emotion and Tone**: Complex discussions can sometimes involve emotional or heated exchanges. Look for strong language, disagreements, or differing opinions expressed in the comments.

5. **Reviewers' Involvement**: If multiple reviewers are actively engaged in the discussion, it suggests a complex review process. This involvement can be seen through their comments, requests for changes, or approval/disapproval of the PR.

My suggestion is to add all/or some of these points in the notes and refer to them in line 29.

Author: I have copied all the metrics into an appendix and referred to it from the main text.
